---
layout: post
title: "The Role of Tradition in Modernity – Ethics of Care and Confucian Ethics"
date:   2021-06-21
tags: [geek]
comments: true
author: Danna
---

The concept of jen  has an important role in China’s long-standing history and serves as the central tenet for Confucianism. While the concept of jen existed before Confucius, primarily referring to the kindness shown by rulers to their subjects, it was not a central part of Chinese ideology until it was established and popularized by Confucius and his disciples, including Mencius, in the 5th-4th century BC.  Since then, the concept of jen has become a key aspect in Chinese belief systems including Confucianism and Taoism,  and is translated to mean “benevolence, love, altruism, kindness, charity, compassion, magnanimity, human-heartedness, humaneness, humanity, perfect virtue, goodness, true manhood, manhood at its best” …etc.

Despite modern-day China having one of the highest rates of atheism and agnosticism among countries, surveys done in 2012 show that 26% of the population  are Confucian or Taoist.  This reflects around 1/3 of the Chinese population or over 456 million people,  not including overseas Chinese populations or non-Chinese followers of these beliefs. The sheer number of people who identify as followers of these ancient ideological traditions begs the question: how well do the tenets of Confucianism, a philosophy developed over 2000 year ago, hold up against modern codes of ethics, specifically the with respect to care ethics and feminist ethics? 

There are two basic responses to the aforementioned question: 1) despite having origins in patriarchal eras/regions, Confucianism can be adapted and reconstructed to fit in with modern ethical standards; and 2) due to the patriarchal influences found in Confucianism, it is incompatible with modern conceptions of care ethics and feminism. This paper will consider the arguments posed by Chenyang Li, a proponent of the first response, and Lijun Yuan, a proponent of the second response, to examine whether Confucianism and the concept of jen are reconcilable with modern ethics. 

In this paper, I will begin by giving a brief overview of the concept of jen and its significance to Confucianism, followed by Li’s argument that both are compatible with modern understandings of feminist care ethics. I will then use Yuan’s objection to Li’s argument as a springboard into my own claim that, while Confucianism was established in a cultural era which upheld vastly different codes of ethics than our own, it is both possible and necessary to reconcile it with modern understandings of care ethics and feminism. 

Overview of Confucian Jen and Li’s Argument:

The term jen is a significant part of the Analects of Confucius  (475-221BC) with 58 of the 499 chapters devoted to the subject alone.  Jen is so deeply ingrained in Confucian philosophy that Confucianism is also known as “Jen Xue” or “the study of Jen”.  To this extent, the two are inextricably linked and despite there being other tenets of Confucianism, I will be focusing primarily on exploring the concept of jen in this paper. To understand the meaning of jen, you must first start with the way the character is written. Jen “仁” consists of two parts: the left side radical “亻” meaning person, and the right side component “二” meaning two. Together this denotes the importance of the relationship between people  to jen such that, when asked how to achieve jen by his disciple, Confucius responded with, “a man of perfect virtue, wishing to establish his own character, seeks also to establish the character of others; and wishing to be enlightened himself, he seeks also to enlighten others”.  

	Because jen regards the relationship between people, specifically the treatment of others by oneself, Chenyang Li argues that Confucian philosophy dictates that to be a person who exudes jen necessitates one to care for others.  He goes on to argue that the different translations of jen – benevolence, love, altruism, kindness, charity, compassion, human-heartedness, and humaneness – all have something in common, namely that these virtues of human relations have ‘caring’ as a central theme.  After all, if a person does not care for others, they cannot be described as having any of those aforementioned qualities.  
	
In this sense, the concept of jen seems to have similar principles as modern-day care ethics. For one, Li points out that caring is the highest ideal in the feminist care perspective and that a modern morality dictates a moral person to be one who cares for others.  In the Analects, Confucius makes a similar claim in Book 16 where he indicates that virtue (especially for those in authoritative positions) includes a commitment to care for all people.  Additionally, both Confucian teachings and modern-day care ethics incorporate the idea that certain actions are obligatory by virtue of respect. Just as Nel Noddings  recognizes that caring involves seeing other people’s reality as a possibility for oneself such that we must act to eliminate intolerances, reduce pain, and satisfy needs,  similarly does Confucian ethics of jen. In book 6, Confucius speaks about how in order to achieve the good for ourselves, we must also help others to the same.  In book 12, he upholds the Golden Rule, “do not do to others what you would not wish done to you”.  According to Li, this demonstrates that Confucius teaches that we must understand the situations of others and care for them accordingly. 

However, it is important to note that while there are guiding statements for becoming a person of jen, jen cannot be achieved by following general principles.  While you can strive to be a gentleman scholar or jūn zǐ by following the tenets of jen, it will be nearly impossible for ordinary people to achieve jen. Each time Confucius was asked by his disciples in the Analects about the method to becoming a person of jen they were met with a different response.  According to Li, this is because specific rules are not an essential feature of Confucian morality.  Rather, specific rules act as guidelines for young people to learn lǐ  (i.e., proper social behaviour or good manners) which are both of lesser importance than jen and useless without it.  This is another commonality that Li identifies between Confucian ethics and feminist care ethics since both leave room for human judgement and allows for other obligations to take precedent.  Under both ethical codes, the moral thing to do depends on the situation, the individuals involved, and the time of the dilemma.  

The generality of morality also allows for followers of jen and Confucian ethics to practice care and show love in gradations, another similarity shared with modern feminist care ethics, such that it is possible to be moral and value those you have personal obligations towards (e.g., family, friends, rulers…etc.) over those you do not.  A core part of modern feminist ethics is recognizing that individual morality is determined by our own set of relations: what is right for me to do depends on the types and strengths of my obligation to others. To this point, Noddings argues that love and care start with oneself and move outwards such that “I care deeply for those in my inner circles and more lightly for those farther removed from my personal life… The acts performed out of caring vary with both situational conditions and types of relationship”. 

Due to these three commonalities between Confucianism and feminist care ethics (shared care values, non-principled approach to morality, and non-universalized love) Li claims that it is possible to adapt Confucianism to fit in with modern standards.  

Response to Yuan’s Objection:
So, what is the problem with Confucian concepts of jen? While Li’s goal is to show that the striking similarities between Confucian jen and modern care ethics means that it is possible to adapt Confucian principles to fit today’s standards, Lijun Yuan’s article focuses on dismantling the idea that similarities can excuse a long-standing history of systemic sexism in traditional Chinese society.  Yuan’s argument is based on the fact that since Confucianism originated in a hierarchical society rooted in systematic sexism,  some of the original teachings found in the Analects  espouse principles which portray women in an unfavourable light. Due to these transgressions, Yuan argues that we cannot dissociate anti-feminist rhetoric so easily from Confucianism as Li does.  

To support her argument, Yuan starts by citing three specific chapters of the Analects as proof of this negative attitude towards women which I will introduce and discuss in turn. The first instance Yuan cites is in book 6, chapter 28 which discusses Nanzi, the consort of Duke Ling of Wei who was “famous for both her beauty and her loose morals”  and who was insinuated to have attempted to sway Confucius’s morals with promises of power.  The second instance is found in book 8, chapter 20 which regards King Wu  and how Confucius claims that a woman does not count as a minister to the King.  The third instance is perhaps the most notorious charge against Confucianism, book 17, chapter 25 in which Yuan understands to mean that women and small men  are of a different and inferior category than the gentleman sage or jūn zǐ.  Yuan then reasons that since women are barred from the category of jūn zǐ, they are unable to reach jen since only elite scholars like jūn zǐ can become enlightened enough to achieve jen.  Therefore, Confucian philosophy necessarily excludes women in their considerations and thus cannot serve as a model for feminist care ethics. 

I will start by addressing Yuan’s first point. The specific line in the Analects goes as follows: “The Master had an audience with Nanzi. Zilu  was displeased. The Master swore an oath: ‘That which I deny, may Tian  detest it! May Tian detest it!’”  Yuan interpreted this this conversation between Confucius and his disciple, Zilu, to mean that the duplicitous Nanzi was planning to conspire with Confucius in exchange for a court position.  However, the depiction of Nanzi as a conspiring woman with loose morals is far from the truth. In actuality, Lady Nanzi served as the standing ruler of the state of Wei because her husband, Lord Ling, withdrew from government.  Her political decisions were sound, and she enjoyed the praise of many (including Confucius) until negative portrayals of her began circling which painted her out to be an adulterous wife who disrupted the line of succession.  Therefore, the interpretation of her appearance in the Analects should not be taken as someone trying to sway the morals of Confucius, but rather as an homage to someone whom Confucius thought highly of. 
The second passage Yuan highlights goes as follows: “Shun possessed five ministers and the world was ordered. King Wu said, ‘I have ten ministers to curtail the chaos.’ Confucius commented, ‘Talent is hard to find, is it not! In the times of Yao and Shun it was most abundant. And of the ten, one was a woman: it was merely nine. The Zhou controlled two-thirds of the empire, yet continued to serve the Yin. The virtue of the Zhou may be said to be the utmost of virtue.’”  While it may seem at first that the passage disparages women from being considered in positions of power, there are a few key points that need to be considered. For one, those familiar with Chinese dynastic history know that King Wu actually inherited seven of his ministers from his father, the legendary King Wen.  Additionally, the woman being referenced here is actually King Wu’s wife  who already held a different position in the palace besides minister, so her role was not to be considered when tallying the number of capable ministers. Finally, the point that Confucius is trying to make in this passage is simply that talent with respect to statecraft is a rare commodity, not that women are somehow less capable and ought to be given less consideration than men. 

The strongest argument against Confucianism being feminist is probably the notorious passage in book 17, chapter 25 of the Analects which is translated as: “The Master said, Women and small men  are difficult to nurture. If you get too close to them, they become uncompliant, and if you stay too distant, they become resentful.”  Yuan’s understanding of this passage interprets Confucius to be making a value-judgement on the nature of two specific groups (i.e., ‘women’ and ‘small men’) specifically in comparison to one another.   This can be seen as damning as ‘small men’ is consistently used to serve as a foil for the noble jūn zǐ.  Thus, on the surface level, this can be taken as Confucius claiming that women, like ‘small men’, are both lacking in virtue and incapable of achieving jen, and thus have no place in Confucianism. However, this sort of value judgement is out-of-place within Confucius’s teachings and has been noted to be atypical.  This led me to do some of my own research into the original Chinese source text.

I will preface my findings with the statement that, although I am Chinese and have a basic understanding of the language, I am nowhere near skilled enough to understand traditional Chinese poetic philosophy. After reading Book 17 in the original Chinese,  I contacted my mother and together we examined Confucius’s teachings and how well the English translations held up. While on the most part, the English version translations remained true to the source material  there was a discrepancy for the translation of Book 17. The problem that I had identified was with the term “女子”, (nǚ zǐ) which both Li and Yuan translated as meaning “woman”. While this is a correct translation, the Chinese language has a particular fascination with how people are identified such that what you are called can depend on who you are in the presence of, your relation to the person/people, marital status, family connection, age, age with relation to the person you are speaking to, affluence, career, familiarity…etc. Therefore, the usage of “女子”struck me as odd since typically, woman as a general term would be translated as “女人” (nǚ rén). The terms “夫人” (fū rén) and “妇女”( fù nǚ) were also commonly used in that time period, both of which refer to women.  

The difference between these terms are as follows: “女子” typically refers to a younger unmarried girl (14 or under) or a concubine to a land-owning household; “女人” is a general term used as a catch all for women in general; “夫人” refers to women who held a modicum of power (either through a prosperous marriage, title of their own, talent in the arts, or influence), and “妇女” refers typically to married women or more mature women.  Through these different interpretations, the translation of “woman” suddenly become inadequate. If Confucius and his disciples meant to imply all women in his teaching, they would have chosen a different available term. However, this discrepancy opens the door to another interpretation of this particular section and one that is, in my opinion, more accurate. Based on the usage of “女子”, it seems that what chapter 25 is actually saying is: ‘it is difficult to reason with those whose dispositions are immature  and there are pitfalls in both showing them too much and too little attention’. If we take this interpretation, then there is nothing inherently sexist about Confucius’s teaching in this chapter. However, this still does not address Yuan’s concern that women seem to be excluded from the status of jūn zǐ.

While it is true that the Chinese Chou Dynasty, like many other ancient civilizations, operated within strict hierarchical and patriarchal standards, there is no evidence in works by either Confucius or Mencius which explicitly incorporates the oppression of women into their views.  Any mentions of patriarchal elements (e.g., concubines) is merely due to the way society was structured back then. However, as time passes and both societies and people change, so too do ideologies lest they fade into obscurity. And while Confucianism has seen many problematic iterations over the 2000+ years since its conception, it would be uncharitable to claim that this is because there is something wrong with the source text, rather this is a problem with the ways we interpret and appropriate ideas. The predominantly masculine tone surrounding discussions of jūn zǐ in the Analects is reflective of the time, but it need not be central to the concept of jen or Confucianism nor in the way it is taught. I know this because my brother and I were taught about the principles of jen, lǐ and dào by my father, a dedicated and passionate Chinese historian, when I was around 15 years old. I have fond memories of evenings spent preparing dinner together where he would ramble on and on about Chinese history over the sound of the kitchen fan. When we got to the part about Confucius, I distinctly remember asking him if I could be a jūn zǐ. He paused and told me that jūn zǐ were highly educated and sage-like men, but he supposed that, if I performed well enough in my academics, I may qualify for consideration. 

This notion of detaching gender expectations from roles is only gaining more and more traction with the evolution and growth of feminist ideals. This phenomenon is not only prevalent here in the West, but also in the East where, due to more and more women entering the work force and achieving success, honorifics such as “先生” (xiān sheng) which have, in the past, been used to refer to a powerful or wealthy man of considerable influence is now also being used to refer to women who hold similar positions. These slow cultural changes only prove that the eventuality espoused by both Li and Yuan is on the horizon. The notion that Confucianism and feminism will meet is a certainty and it is unlikely that one will defeat the other in an ideological battle.  Both are deeply ingrained in cultural concepts of morality and will not be easily uprooted. However, since Confucianism and feminist care ethics are not actually opposed and have quite a lot in common, it is not implausible to conceive of an evolved version of feminist Confucianism becoming widespread amongst current adherents to the philosophy.  After all, there is nothing in the core Confucian teachings which directly bars anyone on grounds of gender, age, social class, or any other identifying factor from aiming to achieve jen. At its core, Confucianism is about building the relationship between oneself and others towards the perfect virtue of jen. 









Sources:
Chan, Wing-Tsit. “The Evolution of the Confucian Concept Jen.” Philosophy East and West, vol. 4, no. 4, Jan. 1955, pp. 295–319., doi:10.2307/1396741.
Kǒng , Fūzǐ. The Analects. Translated by Robert Eno, 2.21 ed., 2015.
Li, Chenyang. “The Confucian Concept of Jen and the Feminist Ethics of Care: A Comparative Study.” Hypatia, vol. 9, no. 1, 1994, pp. 70–89., doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.1994.tb00110.x.
“Population Pyramids of the World from 1950 to 2100.” PopulationPyramid.net, Dec. 2019, www.populationpyramid.net/china/2012/.
Theobald, Ulrich. “Zhou Wuwang 周武王, King Wu of Zhou.” Zhou Wuwang 周武王, King Wu of Zhou (Www.chinaknowledge.de), www.chinaknowledge.de/History/Zhou/personszhouwuwang.html.
Wee, Rolando Y. “Religious Demographics of China.” WorldAtlas, WorldAtlas, 9 July 2019, www.worldatlas.com/articles/religious-demographics-of-china.html.
Yuan, Lijun. “Ethics of Care and Concept of Jen: A Reply to Chenyang Li.” Hypatia, vol. 17, no. 1, 2002, pp. 107–129., doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2002.tb00682.x.

Special thanks to my wonderful mother for giving so much of her time to discuss philosophical topics with me! 
